In reading *The Historian's Craft* I felt much more grounded than I had with Jenkins. I felt that while this book dealt with the theoretical as much as Jenkins did, it was in such a way that the reader was able to let the philosophies sink in much more gradually and was given time to absorb everything. But once I finished the book I found myself asking though, what was this supposed to be teaching me about Historiography? I ended up with a few lessons that will - hopefully - guide me on this journey of historical research. 

The first and foremost is that the historian, while digging into the primary documents, can't take everything that's written verbatim. Shocking! But in all honesty, while I knew this without acknowledging it, it was the way Bloch put it that made me really stop and think about what contemporary authors, from any century, were saying about their world.  

>The truth is that the majority of minds are but mediocre recording cameras of the surrounding world. Add that, since evidence, strictly speaking, is no more than the expression of remembrance, the first errors of perception run the constant risk of being entangled with the errors of memory, that loose, that "slippery" memory, denounced long ago by one of our old jurists. (pg. 101 - in my book, sorry got it off line). 
	
What I found so revolutionary about this, is that it presents the idea that those people in the past whom we have come to revere, weren't infallible. They made mistakes like anyone else, or in some cases even deliberately changed what they knew to be the truth when they sat down to write, but that I believe, was the point of Bloch addressing this issue. 

Jenkins told us, and please correct me if I'm wrong, that it's not really possible to know the "past" and therefore we should find another means of studying history or not do it at all, or something along those line. What I believe Bloch is telling the historian is that, while yes, we can't truly know "the truth" of the past, as long as we assume that the writers of the this past made mistakes, it is possible for the historian to continue in his research, thus uncovering the past as best he can. Because ultimately, at the end of the day, if we start questioning every finite detail of the past, and start believing it is a falsehood, we might as well all change professions. While Bloch wants the historian to be carful, it should be this distrust which furthers exploration of any given field of study. 

Secondly, the use of language. I was very surprised at the last part of the book, namely the part of Nomenclature, and the idea that, "the historian speaks only with words; hence, with those of his country" (pg. 162). While I will admit some of the second half was more difficult than the first, I was intrigued at the explanation of use of terms through the ages, and found that I understood why the historian should be more aware of this aspect of research. While doing my undergrad and embarking on my senior thesis, I chose to do the civil rights march that really started the Troubles. Once I started conducting my research I was faced with two major expressions that took me a long time to understand.  

They were, "republican/Republican" and "peaceful protest march." Of the two "republican/Republican" was the hardest to grasp. Here in America, we know instantly what that means. Concretive, right wing, etc. In  1960s Northern Ireland it meant, and this is a generalization, you were pro Provisional I.R.A. and didn't disapprove of the use of violence, i.e. car bombs, used against the Protestant police force or the soldiers. Yes you were very politically minded, but if you took your handgun to the voting booths, so much the better for you. Quite different from what we know. "Peaceful protest march" was not the unwavering stoic marches that we associate with Dr. King's marches. If you made it home without being brained by a brick by possibly neighbor or have a petrol bomb explode under your feet, that was a good and successful march. Not to suggest by any means that Dr. King's marches ended in rainbows and sunshine, not at all, but "protest march" really meant "riot" in Northern Ireland, something we all know Dr. King was completely against. There, it was your after church activity. Bloch made me realize, that in conjunction with the realization that the accounts of the past can be imperfect, we must also know the language of the past, even if the language is English. For without understanding where those people came from and the weight of the meanings of the words they used, it is really and truly impossible to know "the truth" of the past. 

Finally I came back to our question, "What is the use of history?" How could I take these lessons and defend the use of history? Surprisingly, looking back over my notes, I believe I found my answer in Bloch's introduction 

>But history is neither watchmaking nor cabinet construction. It is an endeavor toward better understanding and, consequently, a thing in movement. (pg. 12)

Now that may well be cheating. **But.** If we are to believe the Post-Modernists, after our generation is put to rest in the ground, history will be no more and there won't be a historical accounting of our times. Well I say poo to that. History is not a fixed date on a piece of parchment or an Instagram post. It is changing, it's fluid, it has moods and fears. No doubt I will find that the Concretive party of the Civil Rights movement did contribute to the North in a positive way at some point in my research. Or that it *was* the I.R.A. who fired the first shot that started the soldiers firing on Bloody Sunday.  And the girls I talk to on Instagram about the women of the Civil Rights movement will surely one day be used as a reference to the case of gender studies 50 years from now. Or not. The point is, what I took from this book and the question above, is that history is not fixed nor should we treat is as such. Rather we should treat is as an ever changing discipline, always full of new discoveries. 
