#Marc Bloch and *the Historian’s Craft*
Marc Bloch, in many ways, appears almost as an antithesis to Keith Jenkins. This is most evident in the introduction to *the Historian’s Craft.* Jenkins’ main line of questioning stems from “Who is history for?” (Jenkins, *Re-thinking History,* 22). Bloch, on the other hand, cares much more about the value of history (Bloch, *the Historian’s Craft,* 6-11). These different approaches can be described as an internalized and externalized approach respectively. Bloch’s approach leads to vastly different conclusions than his fellow historian’s. 
Bloch lists several reasons for history’s importance. His first is that history can entertain. This point, which Bloch unfortunately does not dwell on enough, is important. History, as Bloch sees it, is intrinsically tied to the past. Through this lens, history’s entertainment value may be the reason that it has survived as a field of study for as long as it has. History, specifically oral history, has long had entertainment value as well as value as a source of knowledge.
Entertainment is not the only reason for history, for if it were, history would not be nearly as important as it is. Bloch sees history as a science (10), so therefore it must have some direct benefit to our lives. This benefit comes from the interconnectedness between the past and the present. However, Bloch warns that understanding the present by looking for origins is a fool’s errand (29-30). His argument stems from the inherent ambiguity of the word. Origins can either be beginnings or causes. I agree with the first part of Bloch’s statement that origins as beginnings are impossible to pin down, but I believe that looking for causes can be a useful exercise. Causal relationships, while impossible to completely understand, help people connect the past and present. Through it wisdom can be formed and people can learn how to live from history. Bloch, while not making as strong of a claim as I do, does argue that there is wisdom in seeking past knowledge. He acknowledges this by quoting Michelet “He who would confine his thought to present time will not understand present reality.” (35) Bloch continues by claiming that society is based on past generations, not just the most recent one or two generations (40). By learning about the past, such as the Protestant Reformation, modernists can understand the world they currently live in.
One way in which Bloch agrees with Jenkins is in the concept that the present clouds or shapes the way people understand the past (45). Jenkins takes a negative approach to this conundrum, while Bloch sees it as a positive. I agree with Bloch, to an extent. People without a doubt live in the shadows of their predecessors, but the shadows of the past are just that, shadows. Claiming that looking at the present is a way to understand the past is a dangerous proposition. In order to do this correctly it takes quite a bit of reverse engineering of the present. It is too easy to place modern ideas and ideals onto past individuals when trying to explain the past by way of the present. Bloch does not even consider this problem, while Jenkins claims that it will happen even if historians are not comparing the past to the present (Jenkins, 47-53).
Bloch tends to lean too far into empiricism. Even though he admits that history is, at its best, and emotional journey (Bloch, 8) and that our understanding of the present shapes our understanding of the past, he is not willing to dive into any form of relativism. This is a major weak point of his. Bloch goes as far to claim that there is no chance or probability in history (124). While he is just in claiming that historical events either happened or did not happen, his argument simplifies history too much. Because historical evidence can be scarce or misleading, it is near impossible to say any even in the past happened, or at least the way historians think those events did. Bloch claims “probability remains properly in the future” (125). Probability, contrary to that sentiment, is a necessary component to history. The further back into the past people study, the more obscure and less reliable sources become. Due to this, every source must be taken with a grain of salt. While Bloch claims that events can be verified so chance and probability does not matter, only the basic event can be verified.  Any smaller detail within the larger historical event can be debated and accused of falsehood. Therefore, the probability of history is not looking at how outcomes could have been different, but the probability of history actually happening the way historians describe it.
