Sitting on my balcony reading Marc Bloch’s *The Historian’s Craft* I was reminded of my parents disdain when I announced in the sixth grade that I wished to become a professional historian and write books one day.  My mother looked puzzled.  My schoolteacher father sarcastically quipped “you might as well take up underwater basket weaving, it pays about as much as history does.” Crestfallen I searched for an answer to the question why study history?  As sixth grade faded into memory and seventh grade commenced I realized that the only motivating force that roused me from bed each day was the fact I did not want to miss history classes.  One teacher changed my perception of history and myself with the gift of a worn, dog-eared paperback.  Mr. Schobel believed that a student’s interests and talents should be nurtured.  When he devised an independent study program in history for me I was elated.  My first assignment was a difficult one and he expected great thought from my young mid.  He handed me a copy of Marc Bloch’s The Historian’s Craft and a rather hefty paperback dictionary and gave me one directive…read.  I devoured the book as if I were a starved person sitting down to their first meal in days.  In eloquent, simple prose Bloch summed up my innermost feelings about history:  “As far back as I can remember, it has been for me a constant source of pleasure,” jumped from the page. \(Bloch, p. 7\)  I discovered a kindred spirit.  Unlike Jenkins dense, often times off putting prose that seemed to jumble in my brain, reading Block for the first time in twenty plus years was an interesting experience.  I found myself less depressed after reading Bloch, more aware that despite my overall positive view of his approach that my one time hero does indeed have flaws.  But, they are flaws that I can live with due to his enormous contributions to the craft of history.  

Each time I have read Bloch’s words I am struck by the intensity of his ideas, his passion for the discipline, and the innovative nature \(for the time period\) of his thoughts on how and why we do what we do as historians.  Bloch outlines for his reader not only the methodology he believes yields a richer, fuller historical understanding of humankind, but also the responsibilities that historians must bear in mind when producing scholarship.  Along with Lucien Febvre, Bloch would found the Annales school of historical thought and revolutionize the historical discipline with 1\) a history written from the bottom up approach \(social history\), 2\) the use of other disciplines \(i.e. anthropology, economics, linguistics, sociology\) to fortify the historian’s tool chest and 3\) the use of comparative/parallel studies to search for universal experiences and truths in history over time separated by distance.  Today, many scholars delving into the histories of marginalized groups \(American Indians, African Americans, women, LGBT\) employ social history in tandem with anthropology, sociology, etc. to to create narratives that go beyond mere documentation.  For as we learn from Jenkins and Bloch both, documentation is a human product and therefore subject to bias and not completely objective.  Bloch understands this concept and urges historians to use their sources judiciously filling in gaps with educated, well researched conjecture.  The beauty of Bloch’s work is that he acknowledges that we can never fully understand the past but rather do our best with the sources and tools at our disposal to create a close approximation of what life was like for our respective research interests to the best of our ability.  This is the historian’s greatest duty.  In calling for a bottom up approach to writing history, Bloch broke with his predecessors and many contemporaries that were steeped in the hierarchical great man school of thought that stressed powerful men, wars, great deeds and national building.  

Bloch therefore called for a new kind of scholarship that threw off the yoke of great men, heroic deeds, and stodgy state histories based upon diplomatic and military documents.  Now seeking the tracks of men in the past, Bloch illuminated for his readers the varied and multiple paths that lead the historian to richer more nuanced understanding of the past. Here of course is my only complaint about Bloch; he consistently used the terms “he”, “him” and “his” when his histories actually do speak of the lives of men and women.  However I as I thought about this I also remembered that he was writing in his time and was a man of his time.  As a student of history this excited me.  The idea that I could look at traditional historical sources with multiple lenses and use an arsenal of intellectual weapons proved to me that history was artistic, scientific and could at the same time be poetic and engaging.  

For me the importance of Marc Bloch’s work is how he changed the way historians researched, wrote, and conceptualized history and brought into sharper focus the experiences of people over *la longue duree* .  He used this method when examining the lives of everyday people in Medieval France, the disappearance of serfdom in Ile-de-France, feudal justice and the relationship between monarchy and peasantry in Europe.  Since no historian can transport themselves back in time to bear witness to the events they write about, Bloch gives us a roadmap to do the next best thing.  Does his method have flaws, yes.  All methods have have their weaknesses and strengths as well.  Bloch’s approach demands that the historian step outside their comfort zone and embrace new ways of thinking and research/writing.  No longer can one simply wax philosophical about a historical document or base a monograph on assumptions gleaned from sources that have not been questioned or supported with additional research materials.  A great amount of research and reflection is demanded by Bloch’s method.  Perhaps Bloch’s approach was inspired by his Jewish heritage and the continual scrutiny and persecution that the Jewish people suffered in Europe for centuries before Bloch’s birth.  He actively sought out the voiceless, the weak and downtrodden and elevated them to a place of prominence in his historical works on par with the crowned heads of state.  Today this approach to researching and writing history still provides a great deal to emulate. Simply because the ideas of Bloch and Febvre seem passe to us now does not mean there is no value to them and that the methodology they created does not cease to be useful.  Indeed, today in the field of American Indian history and in the studies of gender, race/ethnicity, writing from the bottom up and adapting the methods from other disciplines yields results that simply examining documents alone could never provide.  The inclusion of oral tradition, anthropology, sociology, economics, etc. helps scholars in my field write histories that flesh out the human experience in ways we never thought possible.  I question weather or not public historians could learn from Bloch’s approach?  While he intended his work for an academic audience, his desire to bring together history with its sister disciplines to create well rounded narratives could be applied to the way public historians research, write and produce history for public consumption. After all, Bloch does at times quip that history is a form of entertainment.  

Even today I still get a lump in my throat as I turn to page 197.  *In a word, in history, as elsewhere, the causes cannot be assumed.  They are to be looked for…* so ends not only Bloch’s manifesto on the responsibility of the historian for their craft but also his life. \(Bloch, 197.\)  The ellipsis…the pause or omission used by a writer to create drama, heighten tension, or to indicate a truncation in text left me hanging in the seventh grade and it still causes me to shudder today.  When I read The Historian’s Craft as a young junior high school student little did I know that the ellipsis at the end of page 197 signified the end of Bloch’s physical life as well.  Not only did Marc Bloch give voice to the voiceless in society, he himself gave his life at the altar of freedom when Nazi bullets cut him down in 1944.  How many historian’s today would be wiling to leave their ivory towers and face their own mortality for a greater good?  I have always wondered as Marc Bloch penned his tome while in a German prison camp how much comfort did his writing bring to him?  Perhaps his writing was a form of self preservation akin to the ledger art created by American Indians who were incarcerated in military prisons and reservations in the 19th century.  Was The Historian’s Craft on his mind’s drafting table before he entered prison or did facing his own mortality spur his intellectual drive to leave one more work to be remembered by?  Of course the million dollar question…what would have come after the ellipsis?  We will never know but in true Blochean \(my own word here folks\) fashion we can look at his body of work, use multiple lenses and disciplines and fill in our own ending to his work by looking at him as the man tracked in his own time.  
