**The Historians Craft** by Marc Bloch
 
Bloch set clear expectations for the  history profession. The book is well organized and his logic was easy to follow even if his rhetoric required extra time for translation. He dissected "dangerous" practices and reenforced fact verification for historical credibility. I particularly enjoyed his annalogy of a historian as a person watching a movie reel. *"But in the film he is examining, only the last picture remains quite clear. In order to reconstruct the faded features of the others, it behooves ... (the historian) first to unwind the spool in the opposite direction from that in which the pictures were taken."* 
 For years, I have thought about the connections between history and film. I enjoy this perspective immensely. Bloch explores History and it's relationship to time and man. Historical events have no origin or beginning as they were caused by a previous event. 

However, I did not agree with all his statements. 
*"A society that could be completely molded by its immediately preceding period would have to have a structure so malleable as to be virtually invertebrate. It would also have to be a society  in which communication was conducted in "Indian File"- The children having contact with their ancestors only through the mediation of their parents."*
 
He goes on to explain that today this is no longer the case. In his (or a theoretical) village, the children (the most malleable), spend time with the grandparent to increase their opportunity to learn about the past from "the most inflexible" people in the community. Additionally, this elder/child pairing serves a practical purpose as the adults are the current catalyst of change, in this case, busy working. 
 
I disagree because Bloch assumes Native children don't spend time with grandparents and that Native children learn only from their parents. Native people followed a similar social pattern as his village, especially in the winter. Children spent time with story-tellers, elders and tribal historians learning about their past. Often, teaching techniques include(d) elements of fun so the children don't realize they are learning philosophy, history and advice for daily problems through stories and games. Many Natives refer to this method as an O.I.T. ("old Indian trick"); if children are having fun, they won't realize they are doing work. I often find similarities between Native cultures and other cultures, in particular the Jewish tradition. If the village Bloch refers to is a Jewish community he (unknowingly) draws a similarity between the two cultures.  Both cultures (or at least small towns in pre-WWII France) employed the same concepts for passing down information. However, I am slightly miffed that Bloch considers Native cultures to be invertebrates. 
 
Bloch spends more time analyzing Historical Criticism than other topics in the book. His explanations suggest caution for historians and left me feeling a strong need to verify facts through multiple sources. I had thought about documents being inaccurate, destroyed or intentionally recording incorrectly for an agenda. However, I hadn't thought about the complexities in motives or reasoning behind false documents. How difficult it would be to split a fact from a twisted embellishment that has become an accepted part of the history. I also appreciated the other examples of unintentional forged historical documents.
 
The Historical Analysis section made an interesting comparison between the job of a judge and a historian. Both listen to and interpret facts. The historian explains while the judge passes a sentence. Initially, Bloch suggested that these jobs are different in that final step. I am not sure they are. The historian passes the ultimate judgment by recording the way events and people are remembered. Is there greater judgment then the words of the person who writes your deeds for all people to see? Later in the chapter, he seems to lean more that direction with examples of words like "success" vs "failure" and how words chosen imply a point of view. Historians quest to obtain "understanding" of events and people to better explain facts. Bloch acknowledges the murkiness of "understanding" in the following: "Understanding, in all honesty, is a word pregnant with difficulties, but also with hope." Hope is ultimately why most people do what they do, including historians. We hope for a better world and that our work may contribute to that world. 

 I am saddened that Bloch wasn’t able to finish the book. It feels unfinished. I know there were more conclusions he wanted to make building off the elements discussed in his book. Lucien Febure suggests that Bloch's intended conclusion, The Role of History in Citizenship and Education, and the appendix titled Teaching History “need not be emphasized.” For myself, the purpose of history is ultimately to teach history. These unwritten chapters about Teaching History and history as a powerful tool to educate a nations' citizens is huge loss. I wish Bloch had a chance to share his perspective on teaching. We learn history to teach it in one form or another.
 
