**The Poetics of History**

In spite of Clark’s assessment that most historians had abandoned their defense of the scientific nature of history by the end of the twentieth century (30), in Bloch and Humboldt, both much earlier than Clark suggests, we see already a movements away from the discussion of history as science. Bloch, as his title suggests, considers it more of a craft, a trained trade, such as carpentry or glassmaking, striving to produce something useful to humanity (hence the question, “what is the *use* of history?” [6]). Humboldt, in a similar vein, initially compares history to science in a sense, as both require “critical investigation” (59), but then he spends much more time and energy arguing for history’s kinship with poetry, and the creative arts (58). Neither author ignores the necessity of science-like structured research, few do, but it is the artistic quality of history (much like the liberal arts in relation to the sciences) whose very existence must continuously be justified. 

Perhaps this is because the scientific elements of history during these periods are considered a given, or perhaps they both considered it a more novel train of thought to highlight history’s less scientific elements. Whatever the case, in both Humboldt and Bloch I see a much more philosophical turn than Clark suggests, which is in line with Jenkins in his re-thinking history, as he takes care to name Bloch by name when mentioning one of (the few) history theorists (3). In Popper and Hempel’s mid-twentieth century theories (Clark 31), we see the push to make history resemble science, and in Bloch and Humboldt, we see the opposite. Jenkins, much later, simply calls history “*sui generis*” (67), not history or art. This is either supremely non-comital, or as close to a “correct” answer as we are liable to get. 

**Greater Patterns: A bit of Irony**

Beyond her descriptions of events within the historical field, Clark remains rather impartial to the arguments she summarizes (except for her very last comment in hesitant support of post-structuralism [41]). This is dissimilar to Bloch and Humboldt, who are writing not a history of historical turns but instead are providing the material Clark is later writing about. Plainly, they are the primary sources. This is mildly ironic, as both Bloch and Humboldt are making quite incensed emotional appeals for how history should be done without the insertion of the historian’s “arbitrarily created ideas” (Humboldt 71), and without making unnecessary judgements (Bloch 138), and yet, in their respective writings, in guiding the reader through their own philosophies, they are in a sense breaking their own rules. Thus, Clark is useful not to illustrate a side, but as a foundation in relation to the other, more argumentative readings.

**Further Distractions from the Point: Weaknesses**

Continuing from the fact that Humboldt and Bloch were writing more as philosophers than historians, certain, and perhaps inevitable, elements drew my attention away from their main points. The very obvious and unavoidable distraction was the context in which Bloch wrote his (final) book. That he could conjure all of his examples without references is astounding (6), and that he did not finish all seven chapters of his book rings within me, a fellow historian, as a true tragedy (not to mention the circumstances of his death [xv; ix]), and I found myself looking, certainly not rationally or impartially, in his examples for hints of what was to come.  

Humboldt was distracting in his comparison of traditional western and non-western cultures. It was cringe-worthy, albeit not unexpected. As he was writing in the early nineteenth century, his confident and objective categorization of Greek and Egyptian art as “real” and Mexican art as “fake” (in spite of his disclamatory discursive footnote [62]), made contextual sense. However, as someone who believes strongly that all human endeavour has merit and it is, to use Bloch’s terminology, rather useless for a historian to make belated judgements about the past (141), such an opinion as Humboldt’s was jarring, if not unfair. Perhaps I am a poorly trained historian, as Humboldt seems to suggest, for not separating “the necessary from the accidental” (61)—or perhaps I am a product of my post-modernist milieu. As far as judgements go, Humboldt was more a philosopher than a historian anyway. 

**Back to the Point: Connecting the Dots**

Humboldt and Bloch, in spite of their dated nature (Bloch laments the amount of resources in libraries [70], something that with today’s technology is not a valid complaint), were inspiring. I was never inspired by math or science in the same way as I was by literature and art—and of course, as I was by history. History has always been a literary endeavour for me, as both authors make it out to be, and it was refreshing to read an article, that referred to history as not only presenting “what actually happened” (Humboldt 57), but also as composing a narrative (60). This in line with my emotional (intuitive) belief, even though I know such an emotional response does not hold up against objectivity—although if objectivity is quite unattainable (Jenkins 13), perhaps emotions (or perhaps intuition [Humboldt 57]) have more of a place in history than positivists would like to believe. As for Bloch’s question of the usefulness of history, this too was inspiring, as was his declaration that one needs to understand and experience the present to understand the past (44). Both of these concepts ring true with me. The first, that (good) history is useful, quells anxieties about the possibility that history serves no greater good; the second prescribes a balance of scholarly endeavour and worldly experience.

Ultimately, I could also connect both authors to previous experiences. On the most basic of levels, Bloch, in his prescriptive chapters on how to write history properly (II, III, and IV), reminded me of the text I used during my undergraduate education to understand history and history theory: John Tosh’s *The Pursuit of History.* Both of these authors discuss the nature of sources, plagiarism, periodization, the types of history, etc. In other ways, I felt a closeness to Bloch as a fellow medievalist, particularly his notion of Christianity as a historical in nature (4-5), and of the question being not if something unbelievable (such as a miracle) happened, but **why** those involved believed, or at least professed, that it had happened (32). This is the same question I find myself asking in my own research, which is predominantly cultural. Witches did not ride broomsticks. There was very likely never large scale Black Sabbaths—so why did people believe in these to such an extent that they brutally executed so many fellow human beings?

Humboldt, I admit, was a little more difficult to relate to, as philosophy persistently seems to elude my understanding. However, his philosophy of history reminded me of two seemingly dissimilar concepts. The first is nineteenth century American Transcendentalism, and the second is medieval mysticism. His perception of only the trained historian being able to properly interpret historical evidence, as the “common observer constantly imbues this appearance with errors and half-truths” (61) is reminiscent of Ralph Waldo Emerson, the leading transcendentalist who claimed that great men needed to lead in all things. As for mysticism, Humboldt’s focus on the necessity of fusing the “raw material” of history with the creative processes of the historian (57-8), is not unlike a mystical union of the fleshly human and the Ultimate, whatever that might be. This parallel becomes even more apparent as Humboldt’s philosophy is developed. He describes the idea almost as the soul of the individual (69), and there is certainly something transcendent (and dare I say Transcendental) about the phrase: “the historian will have to move beyond world events to perceive their true configuration” (68). Truly, doing history can be a mystical experience.


**This week’s readings:**

Clark, Elizabeth A. “Anglo-American Philosophy and the Historians.” In *History, Theory, Text: Historians and the 
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Linguistic Turn,* 29-41. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2004. 

Humboldt, Wilhelm von. “On the Historian's Task.” *History and Theory* 6, no. 1 (1967): 57-71. 
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;http://www.jstor.org/stable/2504484. [First published 1822]

Bloch, Marc. *The Historian’s Craft.* Translated by Peter Putnam. New York: Vintage Books and Alfred A. Knopf, Inc., 
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1953. 

**Extra sources:**

Tosh, John. *The Pursuit of History: Aims Methods and New Directions in the Study of Modern History.* 5th ed. 
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Harlow, UK: Pearson Education Ltd., 2010. 

Jenkins, Keith. *Re-thinking History.* New York: Routledge Classics, 2003.
