Early on in The Historian’s Craft, Marc Bloch emphasizes that history is not “the science of the past” but can be boiled down to the study of man. One of the ways that Bloch attempts to distinguish between history and other disciplines is the presence of the “human element” within history (p. 25). Bloch appears to emphasize that there is history within astronomy, geology, and the other sciences but only so much as these describe the way that the subjects studied in these fields have materially changed over time. Instead, Bloch argues that humans are central to what we consider history because it is the history of past individuals and the things they did or experienced in their own lives.

This analysis of history rests greatly on individuals as it even states that “behind institutions, which seem almost entirely detached from their founders, there are men” (p. 26). However, Bloch begins to qualify this statement that explaining that history is not just the study of men but “men in time.” His humanist position that we strive to scientifically study those men that lived in their historical moment is undermined though by Bloch’s own recognition of the discord between the time of the historian and the time of the person who is a subject of the historian. He mentions barriers such as the fact that “there are states of mind which were formerly common, yet which appear peculiar to us because we no longer share them. (p. 80).

There seems to be an issue in that Bloch explicitly states that beyond these institutions simply lies an amalgamation of people but that simultaneously we are limited in understanding how these people thought because our mode of thinking is also molded by the prevailing zeitgeist. If history is simply made up by people but they are too molded by their society at large then our study should not be seen as a humanist one but one that is decidedly oriented toward structural/societal developments. History as a discipline is instead directed not at men but at the transformations and variations of those societies that men produced.

Bloch does warn that “a man may wear himself out just as fruitlessly in seeking to understand the past, if he is totally ignorant of the present” and in doing so understands how the needs and perspective of the present shape the ways that historians approach the past (p. 43). These questions and concerns are again part of a larger social condition that make it too difficult to say that one is studying people in time but that historians are instead understanding their current society and wanting to know how past developments have shaped it.
