“It’s 2012 and all’s well”. Marxism is dead. Again. As dirty as one in a cheap metropolitan hotel, the bed of Marxism (in this case the death-bed) shows the traces of all who payed homage to the cadaver. Gross. I know. But academic discourse goes beyond vulgarity and offering a Retrospect, such as Iggers’, of the Marxist tradition of historical writing resembles describing the stains of dirty bed-sheets. The writer’s pretext? “Marxist theorists moved away from a focus on economics and politics to philosophy and culture. Marxism was increasingly located at the universities, separated from political action” (Georg G. Iggers, The Marxist Tradition of Historical Writing in the West. A Retrospect from the Beginning of the Twenty-First Century, 2012, p. 2. From now on G.G.I., 2012). Was that a problem? Yes! “The self-identification of political theorists as Marxists is highly problematic because Marx’s views were by no means systematic or consistent, but changed with circumstances.” (G.G.I., 2012, p.3). In synthesis: Marxism moved away from economics and politics, where its historical and materialistic approach would have been built on the analysis of the circumstances upon which politics would have had an actual impact, to philosophy and culture, which determined its death by taking it away from the historical circumstances and trapping it in a purely theoretical cage.
A legitimate question could be: is political thought really confined to ‘high political philosophy’? Or it is produced by and in turn focuses on political institutions – not the least political parties. Gramsci’s insight that political thinkers close to parties (including extra-parliamentary groups) were important in fashioning parties as ‘experimenters’ in concepts and ideas could have served as a corrective to Iggers’ Retrospect. Not by fortuitous coincidence does Iggers write: “Considerations of hegemony and social inequality, which were prime concerns of Marxist historiography as understood by Gramsci, formed parts of the historical conception of the Italian microhistorians. But the main attack on Marxism came not from microstoria but from post-modern proponents of the cultural and linguistic turn who challenged the very possibility of a social or historical reality apart from discourse.” (G.G.I, 2015, p. 44) “The cultural and linguistic orientations have in fact enriched the understanding of social reality by placing capitalist society into the context of culture and everyday life.” (ibid., p 13)
A welcomed (by me) change of pace was offered by T. J. Jackson Lears, The Concept of Cultural Hegemony: Problems and Possibilities, The American Historical Review, 1985. Here the author reads Gramsci’s theory as one which “anticipated Michel Foucault's emphasis on the role of "discursive practice" in reinforcing domination. Following Gramsci’s realization that "every language contains the elements of a conception of the world." (T.J.J.L., 1985, p. 569) Jackson Lears clarifies that hegemonic cultures can be placed anywhere on a continuum from "closed" to "open." In the closed version, subordinate groups lack the language necessary even to conceive concerted resistance; in the open version, the capability for resistance flourishes and may lead to the creation of counterhegemonic alternatives. The place of a culture on the continuum depends on specific circumstances at a particular historical moment (and here the ‘circumstances’ play the role of the flexibility of reality and its reading, instead of Iggers’ lack of systematics and coherence (T.J.J.L., 1985, p. 573-4).
Flexibility has been read as a difficulty and has led some historians to charge that Gramsci's concept of cultural hegemony is not a "falsifiable hypothesis." “If one assumes that workers ought to be class-conscious revolutionaries, then all evidence of their non-radicalism can be fitted into the same mould as a demonstration of the success of ruling-class hegemony (T.J.J.L., 1985, p. 578).” Again, it depends: let us read E. P. Thompson, The Moral Economy of the English Crowd in the Eighteenth Century, 1971. “It is possible to detect in almost every eighteenth-century crowd action some legitimizing notion. By the notion of legitimation I mean that the men and women in the crowd were informed by the belief that they were defending traditional rights or customs; and, in general, that they were supported by the wider consensus of the community.” Thompson’s English crowd share moral values which encompass classes and diets. “On occasion this popular consensus was endorsed by some measure of licence afforded by the authorities. More commonly, the consensus was so strong that it overrode motives of fear or deference.” (E.P.T., 1971, p. 78) “Rebellious phrases can often be found, usually (one suspects) to chill the blood of the rich with their theatrical effect.” (E.P.T., 1971, p. 126-7) Indeed, the historian here finds evidence of the non-radicalism “of which a Trobriand islander need not have been ashamed”. (E.P.T., 1971 p. 131) Gramsci might have suggested that this reading, rather than the behavior of the English crowd--supposedly composed, although hungry--can be fitted into the success of ruling-class hegemony which, through its intellectuals, tries to reiterate how the English people stand proud and alone for politeness, containing any involuntary spasms, even in the times of dearth. In Thompson’s interpretation the food riots, before the new political economy of the free market defeated the old moral economy of provision, was not “a direct, spasmodic, irrational response to hunger--a picture which is itself a product of a political economy which diminished human reciprocities to the wages-nexus”. (E.P.T., 1971, p. 136)
Subalternity is one of the core concepts which belong to my personal theoretical luggage. I owe Gramsci as much as I owe the Subaltern Studies Group or Subaltern Studies Collective. I owe Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, in particular, who chooses to adopt the notion of the subaltern essentially because “it is truly situational.” Subalternity has been transformed into the description of everything that does not fall under strict class analysis; it has no theoretical rigor. I find it useful exactly in this way. It is perfect for the fluidity of roles and powers that I need in dealing with the history of queenship. No methodology, even the most ambitious Marxist one, such as Gramsci’s, could avoid a sort of essentialism in its attempt to define who or what may constitute the subaltern group. My debt to Marxism and Gramscian theory stops here.
