**Marxist Historiography**


Reading about Marxist historiography was of great interest to me because the idea of class warfare is still current in the world as Occupy protests have emerged in the last several years in response to a perceived class warfare between the richest top 1% and the remaining population (the Other 99%), so it is still very relevant.  Even though the readings came to overall different conclusions about Marx, what I found to be the common theme was that Marx was correct in his assertion that capitalism is dysfunctional, but they also agree that he was wrong in his belief that the proletariat class would rise up to overthrow the bourgeoisie to implement a social revolution.  

Jenkins had actually somewhat set the stage for the discussion of Marxism in historiography in his discussion of bias and his perception that history is what people make of it.  In stating that people write history in a way that suits them, he asserts that those that follow Marxism will see an extensive discussion of party lines and class struggles (Jenkins 45).  Clark echoes this sentiment when she says that, “Marx proposed a different conceptual history that focused on the ‘mode of production, social formation, infrastructure, superstructure, ideologies, classes, class struggle’” (Clark 81).  

Starting with David Prychitko’s piece, *Marxism*, he offers a thorough overview of Marxist principles which made me glad that was the first one I read because I needed that overview.  He made an important point when he stated that it may be more the unintended result of government intervention than inherent characteristics of a free-market society that have caused recessions and depressions.  One thing about Marx is that Marx focuses so intently on class struggles that other variables are not factored into the equation.  Government intervention is a very important factor because governments are participants in the free market.  Prychitko goes on to say that Marx “just didn’t get it” and that, “free-market economies lift the masses from poverty and create the necessary institutional conditions for overall political freedom.”  I am less certain of this statement (given that Prychitko is an economist, it is possible that he is *biased* as Jenkins would say) because in capitalist societies such as the United States, there are instances of vast numbers of people living in poverty despite the long-term economic growth of the country as a whole.  I fail to see his statement as a given or as self-explanatory. 

The next piece, *The Marxist Tradition of Historial Writing in the West* by Georg Iggers, was fascinating, especially in linking Marx’s criticism of capitalism to the rejection of capitalism we saw in the 1960’s and how that related to and encouraged the Civil Rights movement.  He agrees that Marx was clearly wrong in asserting that socialism would take over after a revolution created by the proletariat, but he states that everyday life did change, which in its own way is a social revolution.  The political and economic system simply stayed in tact.  Considering the amount of government intervention, this is actually not surprising to me.  The government must benefit from the way the system is, so there is little incentive to change it.  

T. J. Jackson Lears’ article, *The Concept of Cultural Hegemony*, and his discussion of Gramsci and the historical bloc discussed a twist that Marx had not considered.  To be dominant and in control, a certain degree of consent by those being controlled is required.  This enables the dominant to be hegemonic.  Gramsci’s theory acknowledges that coercion by those aspiring to be hegemonic is required at some point, but resistance to the hegemony is not always in place.  In addition, Gramsci’s idea of the historical bloc explains more and “fills in the blanks” in a way that Marx’s theory of class struggle doesn’t.  It is simply more encompassing than only grouping people together based on their economic status and assuming they would bond together because of economics.  Culture can provide an exceedingly strong bond for people in a way that sharing an economic status cannot.  One point made by Lears that stood out to me was that, “Historians have long been willing to evaluate the behavior of elite leaders as mistaken, inappropriate, perhaps even perverse or irrational… but to apply similar standards to the ‘people’ is somehow ‘elitist’” (Lears 573).  This made me consider, why is that?  Are there many situations in which it is in fact the people to “blame?”  

As some of my fellow classmates have stated, E.P. Thompson’s *The Moral Economy of the English Crowd in the Eighteenth Century* was a little confusing at times to read.  What stood out to me was the historical bloc notion again when it is stated that, “The food riot did not required a high degree of organization.  It required a consensus of support in the community, and an inherited pattern of action with its own objectives and restraints” (Thompson 119).  At least to me, this spoke of the historical bloc because a sense of support throughout a community usually resonates on a level deeper than simply economic.  A community is usually held together by something more than simply socioeconomic status.  It just made sense to me.  

In sum, Marx was clearly wrong about some points (i.e., the proletariat rising up to create a social revolution that would cause capitalism to collapse and bring socialism to the table), but spot on with other points (capitalism is dysfunctional and there are varying degrees of exploitation within the system).  Overall, Marxist historiography still provides a valuable framework for us to understand capitalism in a new way and from a different group of people (the working class then, feminist and ethnic groups now).
