**Real Marxist Experience**

Concepts of reality and experience repeatedly appear in this week's articles on Marxist historiography. Yet, as noted in Clark (79), Marxist historians avoid epistemological questions that would explain how the real is known or accessed. What are they scared of? 

The articles all share the idea of a real past and the human experience of this past that the historian can access. Clark mentions Thompson's focus "on the role of the 'experience' of the working class" and his exhortation to cloistered historians to "encounter the actual personnel of the labour movement." (82) Similarly, Lears believes the historian should "try to reconstruct the human experience of history." (593) Iggers critiques the "linguistic turn" for a disconnect with reality. 
>When the linguistic turn was carried to an extreme in which the *real* conditions under which class functioned in a capitalist society were reduced to forms of discourse, in ignored the *actual* functions of the capitalist economy which brought about the interconnected inequality of money, power, and position. (14, my emphasis)

Critiques of Marx could also appeal to this idea of the real. The authors of *Uber Marx hinaus* argued that "Marx, by concentrating on capital neglected the social and political dimension of history as it concretely affected the lives of the working population." (Iggers 21) Reality does not even have to be fully apprehended by the historian to have a function. Lears relates the work of Gaventa on coal miners and their lack of resistance to capitalism, noting that historians can "recover alternatives that were no less real because they were submerged or silent." (585) The real, actual, concrete experience is contrasted with the realm of theory, it is the physical effects of theory into practice.

How does a historian determine the "real" and how can one access it? Clark mentions Perry Anderson's critique of Thompson, that there is "no way to distinguish 'valid' from 'invalid' experience," (how do we know it's a REAL real experience?) and a more linguistic critique that "although experience may be based on real processes, it does not simply reflect them." (82-83) A real experience is filtered through language, culture, and loses the real by the time it gets to the historian.
Jenkins would probably have some critiques too, like, how exactly does one engage with "the experience of the working class," empathy?

Why might Marxist historians be so reluctant to deal with these epistemological questions and critiques? The problems they cause for a teleological, inevitable victory of the proletariat, Marxism seem obvious, but that position is currently held by few. Some, like Hobsbawm, might be leery that any questioning might become a slippery slope to relatavism. "If there is no clear distinction between what is true and what I feel to be true, then my own construction of reality is as good as yours or anyone else's." (Clark 84) Another possibility comes up in Thompson's reply to his critics. Experience "'walks in without knocking' in the form of death, crises of subsistence, unemployment, and genocide." (Clark 83) Questioning this reality or the historians' ability to access experience could decorporealize the pain experienced by the working classes, mask with theory the violence committed against them, obscure the miseries of working class life into intellectual abstractions. Do epistemological and ontological questions dehumanize the past? Is that reason to avoid asking them, or is there a way for Marxists to answer them and to continue to "critique the capitalist social order and call for emancipaction on a broad scale across gender and ethnic lines"? (Iggers 17)

