**Notes from Marxist Historiography Readings**

It was fun to revisit slightly more familiar territory this week with the readings on Marxist historiography.  The George Iggers paper was a poignant reintroduction to the twentieth century’s revamp and revision, if not complete abandonment of Marxist theory (even as E.P. Thompson raged against the machinery of reinterpretation).  This is a story that you have probably heard before, but may have forgotten, and Iggers’ portrayal was succinct and fruitful.  Western Marxism’s deliberation over the legacy of historical materialism in an era of discredit from Stalinist purges and Soviet smack downs of their satellite states shows the state of western history writing in the last hundred years or so.  The Iggers essay fills in some blanks on the timeline relative to some of the other readings this semester, showing how approaches to writing history can fall from favor in light of surrounding events and a changing discourse. The orientation offered by the Iggers piece is particularly useful this week in light of Elizabeth Clark's introduction of structuralism's attacks on history, in which one nearly needs a Literary Theory dictionary just to keep up.  Much of the polemics of our readings have been largely implicit to this point.  Clark's chapter on Language and Structure, however, makes explicit the now-open warfare between structuralists (and later poststructuralists) and historians: "French structuralists during the mid-twentieth century waged a campaign against 'humanism,' 'the subject,' and 'reference' that could not but take history as a primary opponent." (Clark 42)  What these terms even mean in this context is puzzling, especially as they sometimes seem to be defined less by their content than by whom the opponents may be of whomever is bandying them about.  Iggers by contrast gets props here simply for readability, if nothing else.        

Less satisfying, I thought was the David Prytchiko article from *The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics*, which seemed to revert to a Cold War era economic argument “proving” the failure of Marxism as a valid worldview.  This is the narrative many of us grew up with, in which the incoherency of the Labor Theory of Value, failure of the Proletariat to rise and overthrow their oppressors, and the disintegration of the one great Marxist state show *ipso facto* the poverty of Marx’s complete works.  This article was less than convincing for me, and Prytchiko’s analysis of *Alienation* left me feeling that perhaps he had missed the point of much of Marxist thought.  “Marx claimed that we are alienated…because many of us toil in tedious, perhaps even degrading jobs…because we have not yet designed a society that is fully planned and controlled, a society without competition, profits and losses…and so on—a society that, Marx predicted, must inevitably appear as the world advances through history.”  (Alienation section)  This is an impatient and inaccurate portrayal of Marx’s writing on alienation.  Anyone who has ever had a job knows better than Prytchiko seems to that “alienation” is more than a frustration with being unable to live in a “planned and controlled” society (it may well be the opposite of this).  Alienation exists on a psychic level that pre-empts and precedes theory, and Marx’s treatment of it has more depth than Prytchiko seems able to ascertain.   

Especially timely for our recent discussions about the uses and abuses of history is T.J. Jackson Lear’s “The Concept of Cultural Hegemony: Problems and Possibilities.”  Jackson Lear’s explanation of the usefulness of Gramsci’s concept of *hegemony* is a welcome relief from some of the more polemical readings of late, in that it explores (as advertised) the *possibilities* this concept affords historical study.  Gramsci’s concern with the relationship between culture and power led him to seek out the source of the “spontaneous consent” he witnessed in his contemporary Italy newly under fascist dictatorship.  For Jackson Lear, Gramsci’s distinction of the conflict between consent and force—hegemony—“has little meaning unless paired with the notion of domination.” (JL 569)  Yet this construction can yield great results for the historian “trying to understand how ideas reinforce or undermine existing social structures…”  (JL 568)  This is welcome news for historians hoping to incorporate *power*—generally the domain of post structuralists—into their own work.  

The significance of this re-appropriation of *power* is that it democratizes its use, while challenging theorists who have long since announced complete domination of the individual at the hands of often murky forces: in postmodern society, the individual is dominated by the structure of language, dominated by social restraints, dominated by state power.  Indeed, in the *panoptic* cells of Jeremy Bentham’s prison in Foucault’s *Discipline and Punish* the prisoner has internalized his subjection to such extent that it no longer matters whether his jailer watches him or not.  The prisoner moderates his own behavior in his conviction that he is being monitored by an unseen force, his acquiescence to power complete.  Such is the prevailing narrative of much of poststructural theory.
For Gramsci, however domination is fluid because consent and force are always in flux, and must be negotiated on an ongoing basis.  Though the reality of this idea may be seen as optimistic at best by some analysts, Gramsci’s schema has endured as a conceptual tool because of its profound explanatory power.  Jackson Lear’s article is thus especially gratifying in pointing out the possibilities for scholars of hegemonic study.   Much like aspects of Marc Bloch’s  *The Historians Craft* it succeeds in being more prescriptive than defensive, and was a joy to read.   
