*Marxist Historiographical Selections*

**The Role of Language**

Perhaps not as deep an insight as others may have regarding this material, one recurring issue that struck me throughout reading the Marxist selections was the consistent and universal return across all the selected readings to the use and significance of language. It would appear that most, if not all, of the authors would agree with, or are putting into use, the principles of terminology and language as addressed by Jenkins. (Jenkins, 26) Jenkins had highlighted the subjectivism, relativism, and indeed power of language and terminology to the study of history, whether it be misappropriation of a term due to misunderstanding, the misleading use of an anachronistic term, the struggle to use outdated or commonly-understood terms to insufficiently describe a new or more developed idea, or the conscious framing of an idea using a specific name so as to benefit one’s ideals or position from a standpoint of power. Even Bloch, who as we saw seemed quite the opposite of Jenkins in most cases, examines the complexities and dangers of language and terminology in his extensive section on Nomenclature (Bloch, 156). He says of the problem, “Unlike mathematics or chemistry, our science has at its disposal no system of symbols unconnected with national language.” (162)

**Thompson**

This is where (despite Jenkins concern that we will never escape the manipulation of language, versus Bloch, who as I understood it, wishes us to get as close as we can to one that is universally understood and appropriate despite those same concerns) the authors of the Marxism pieces seemed to jive with each other, and both Bloch and Jenkins. Each addresses the language as a constant concern of Marxist thought and history. Already in his opening, Thompson places his discussion in the context of terminology, saying of the use of the term “mob”, “I wish in this article to extend the warning to the term ‘riot’, especially where the food riot in eighteenth-century England is concerned. This simple four-letter word can conceal what may be described as a spasmodic view of popular history. According to this view the common people can scarcely be taken as historical agents before the French Revolution.” (76) His concern is the use of such a simplistic turn eliminates agency, thought, and individual decision-making amongst the “mob” in the common understanding. He spends the entire article showing how it is the exact opposite, including the planning, organization, and “restraint” of many demonstrations (111-112). Personally, I read his argument entirely inside this quickly established context that my simplistic understanding of what a “mob” or “riot” was and is just that: too simplistic. All from a simple use of commonly “understood” terms. 

**Lears**

Lears however, waits until near the end of his article to address the role of language in his examination of Gramsci and hegemony, pointing out that even Gramsci’s “earliest writings stressed the centrality if language in cementing a given group’s prestige and cultural leadership” (589). This echoes Jenkins emphasizing of the role of power in the use of history, especially as for Lears it pertains to that very power-related issue, hegemony. In reference to this, Lears continues: “The rhetoric of a dominant culture may contain more than clues to its hegemony” and calls language “the ground of meaning” a characterization Bloch would perhaps agree with. It is no coincidence that his addressing of language proceeds directly to ideology and its role in law and beliefs and values as tools for maintaining hegemony. All benefit immensely from effective use of language (590).

**Iggers**

While Thompson opened with it, and Lears waited until nearly the end, Iggers addresses it halfway through his article on Marxism’s relevance in the 21st century. Indeed, Iggers places immense significance on language as the source of the “main attack on Marxism” coming from post-modern proponents of the cultural and linguistic turn who challenged the very possibility of a social or historical reality apart from discourse.” Furthermore, they rejected Marxist class concept “because it rested on an economic reality which for them was the construct of language, not language the reflection of reality” (13). Iggers does point out that Marx’s far too narrow definition of class has been mostly corrected by the left, particularly in regards to including themes of culture and social issues, as previously Marx’s conception of class “reflected the dominant male oriented and Eurocentric outlook of the time…” (13). This is very much in line with Bloch’s utilization of the “old Arab proverb” that “Men resemble their times more than they do their fathers” (35). Perhaps this old adage could summarize the theme of Iggers’ and others’ attempts to build on Marx, to keep his ideas relevant, or to address whether they still can be.

**The Universality of Language**

While language, terminology, and linguistics was an issue common to all of these authors’ studies, it was approached from different angles by each. For Thompson, his concern over terminology came more from the bottom up, focusing on the complex realities on the ground amongst a ‘oppressed mob’. Lears, on the other hand, dealt with language as it pertains to hegemony, and so explored the use and maintenance of power over “lower classes” (and also those groups’ ability or failure to make use of it to change the hegemony). Iggers dealt with it on a much more general scale, addressing language and linguistics’ place in Marxism as a whole, in order to help examine and characterize its relevance in today’s world. So though these articles exhibited the universality of language as a concern or complicating issue for historians, as both Bloch and Jenkins addressed, each author demonstrated the approach to addressing it, or the nature of its concern, is not universally the same. 
