
**Marxist Articles**

While confusing me to no end, Clark did help me understand Thompson (a little bit) and connect him to authors we have already read.  According to Clark, Thompson believed "radical resources lay in the early English working-class tradition that could inspire demands for social justice in the present" (Clark, 80).  Clearly we see in *The Moral Economy of the English Crown in the Eighteenth Century* that Thompson is fond of the early English working-class--and bread.  But to point, Thompson's argument for the past inspiring demands for social justice in the present resonates with Bloch.  On page 47 Block argued for the *definition* of history to encapsulate the present.  Bloch posits it is our own personal past which lives in us (albeit fluidly) in the present that we call on as historians to recreate the past/past events: “…it is always by borrowing from our experiences and by shading them, where necessary, with new tints that we derive the elements which help us to restore the past” (Bloch, 44).  This echoes Jenkins correct claim that the present is "where all history starts from and returns to" (Jenkins, 81).

Out of these readings I am most partial to Lears.  Lears argues subjectivity and fluidity for Gramsci, which lends itself to Jenkins.  Lears posits that the picture that Gramsci "provides us is not a static, closed system of ruling-class domination.  Rather, it is a society in constant process, where the creation of counter hegemonies remains a live option" (571).  This succinctly speakings to Jenkins as he argues history "is constantly being reworked and reordered by all those who are variously affected by power relationships" (Jenkins, 21).  Essentially, we're looking at power, as well as how it affects people, and therefore histories.  I think what's been happening with these evolutions in the professional field of history is we as historians are being given more room to explore, more methods to look into the past and unpack what we see in it for the present. (I think especially of Clark's piece this week and the great, yet difficult for me to understand, historiography she gives).

David Prychitko's piece came across very bluntly to me--marxism failed.  From how I understood Lears, he would respond to that by saying, David, brother, don't be so harsh man," that marxism did not have to be as rigid as some folks see it to be--see Gramsci and his more expansive interpretation of marxism. Iggers, on the other hand, gives a righteous historiography on marxism and doesn't end his piece with "marxism sucks."  Although Iggers admits Marx's predicted "inevitable progression from capitalism to socialism" never occurred, he still maintains that despite Marx's shortcomings, "his insights continue even today to provide powerful tools for critical historical analysis" (Iggers, 1, 3).  Iggers argues for a more fluid take on Marx, which directly speaks to Lears' view of Gramsci, as well as some philosophical underpinnings of Jenkins and Bloch.  "Marx's views were by no means systematic or consistent, but *changed with circumstances* (Iggers, 3, emphasis mine).  Indeed, as Iggers continues he notes "how inadequate Marx's class analysis of industrial countries can be…" (Iggers, 5).  Of interest to me, then, in this whole Gramscian cultural hegemony theme that stuck with me, is that Iggers informs his readers Gramsci's *Prison Notebooks* "laid the philosophic foundation of what was to be known as Western Marxism" (Iggers, 6).  "Western Marxism." "Structuralism."  What these *mean* is where I have fallen short this week.

I was unable to comprehend the red historiographical thread this week.  As I believe it was Jenkins who introduced me to post-modernism, I had never been introduced to structuralism, post-structuralism, and the whole revolution of those linguists.  Sure I've read a little Foucault and a couple Chomsky books, but they have never been contextualized for me in terms of historiography--or whatever one would call the historiography of the humanities and social sciences.  What I hoped for while doing this week's readings was to have my colleagues around to help clarify things--read: Clark; but Thompson's diction was pure baffling.  This is by no means a complaint, more so noting a desire to discuss these articles in an attempt to learn.  Hence, I look forward to tomorrow!

Cheers,

-Victor 
