Late thoughts. Swinging, drowsy and non-linear reasoning about History and historians.

If we believe that any subject of study needs justification, this would obviously include History. The range of justifications for History has, over the centuries, been quite ample: a knowledge of certain historical facts helped distinguish the educated from the uneducated; History should be studied because it is useful, even more, it is essential to individuals and to society; History should be studied because it harbors beauty: History should be studied because it harbors a moral lesson.

It seems that History offers, in a blurred conceptual place where definition and justification overlap, the only extensive evidential base for the contemplation and analysis of how societies function, and ‘people’ – whoever these might be - need to have some sense of how societies function simply to run their own lives.

Does the shift from the question ‘what is History’, to ‘who is History for’ (Jenkins, 22) really open an alternative venue to clarify what History is?

To paraphrase Lata Mani's question, posed from the interdisciplinary perspective of cultural studies, "When does a tool kit degenerate into a grab bag?" (Cultural Studies, 1992, 394) Much of the debate about theory within feminism has been stimulated by the focus on language and representation, involving differences about the way in which challenges to "the real" can be incorporated into historical writing, and worries about the effects on history writing of a theory which takes causality, agency, and experience - all significant components of traditional historical explanation - to be problems requiring analysis rather than starting points of analysis. As historians have struggled to resolve these theoretical conflicts, they have begun to focus on how poststructuralist theory can be profitably transformed in historical practice. Moreover, historians have paid closer attention to the ways that systems of meaning interact with material conditions, to the struggle over meaning among willful agents in specific social and political circumstances, to the relationship between prescription and practice, and to the suggestive silences and omissions of the evidence.

Who then, decide what is History and what is not? Most importantly, from my point of view: who decides who is an historian and who is not? History, like science, or art is as such only if the social circuits of validation (technical language, academia, art museums and so forth) decide so. 

Escaping this kind of observations, but still feeding the reader’s mind with intrigue, Keith Jenkins quotes Hayden White (from his 1978 “Tropics of Discourse”) to the effect that every discipline is defined (as Nietzsche understood) by what it forbids its practitioners to do (J, 68).

This might mean that being a historian should be about confronting the orthodoxy that insists on the exclusively empirical-analytical-representationalist definition of history. Bringing ‘philosophy’ into the understanding of the nature of history, consequently, would be ‘the’ essential step in the direction opposite to solipsism. And yet, the opposition to solipsism may not be immediately evident; and in this I find Jenkins provocative. Many practitioner historians think that ‘doing’ History in the archive represents the ‘down to facts’ reality, the objective ground opposite to theorizing about History, which would be an exercise conducted in isolation and would be leading, indeed, to solipsism. Quite the opposite: the philosophical input could bring historians to reflect on the definition of History.

Inevitably I remembered Gayatri Spivak’s own citation of Hayden White’s ironic attack on the historian who searches for the absolute truth ‘buried in the archives, hoping to find the “form of the reality” that will serve as the object of representation in the account that they will write “when all the facts are known” and they have finally “got the story straight”’ (White, 1978, in Spivak, 1999: 202–3). For Spivak, as for White, wanting to ‘get the story straight’ is an act of disavowed epistemic violence, which prevents attention to the political investments that motivate the desire to know, and that generate a writer’s epistemological and methodological practices. In a feminist context, which stories predominate or are precluded or marginalized is always a question of power and authority.

In its own words Jenkins’ argument does not lead too far from the previous one: ‘history is basically a contested discourse, an embattled terrain wherein people(s), classes and groups autobiographically construct interpretations of the past literally to please themselves’ (J, 23). 

It would seem that historians have become far more sensitive to the literary and linguistic nature of the sources they use. It is also, to my mind, incontestable that treating documents as texts has led to major advances in the distinction between linguistic representation and events. The battle lines now, then, are drawn around whether representations are all we have, and if so, whether this is what we really meant by studying ‘events’ anyway. In this perspective I appreciated Clark’s polemical project against methodological objectivism, which, made clear in the introduction, is carried out very quietly under the guise of a narrative. Beginning with Ranke, and moving through structuralist linguistics, narrative, hermeneutics, and poststructuralism, the narrative logic of the story left me with the reassuring sense that there can simply be no return to objectivist history, and further that intellectual rigor is not sacrificed in the process.

I shall leave this repository with a swinging state of mind: is it silly to quibble over terminology? Ideas versus practices? Elite versus popular culture? What is the relation between language and experience?  Does the historian belong in his/her text or should s/he be camouflaged behind the third person singular?
