#### Too Many Numbers 

>Le Roy Ladurie championed the climate as a new topic of research: "history without people," he joked. (Clark, 68) 

I don’t think I have ever read a truer quote than that. Clark doesn’t spend a whole lot of time on Ladurie, rather she gives this big picture of this *new history* or this *method* history, seeming to try to encapsulate a very broad topic quickly, one that I was unaware of until Saturday morning. And while I will admit I have my issues with this way of doing history, I will try to be fair when digging for its benefits. 

I will be honest and say that I understood only a small portion of *The Peasants of Languedoc.* And when I say that I understood very little of this book, I mean that I know next to nothing of early modern France, I didn't know a county existed there called Languedoc, and I am not a farmer so many the different types of bread grain were, from the most part, lost on me. So when I started reading this book, I was at a loss as to what I was to glean from it, and found myself often asking *Why should I care about this?* Any history book that has that many numbers per page isn't something I have ever been overly eager to read. But then once I read Clark, I decided to put myself in the mindset of Bloch and try to see why a historian would try to do history/historiography in this confusing and very scientific way. So, for the remainder of the book, rather then try to understand early France from this very statistical view point, I thought of the entire book rather as merely a device to add to the broader aspect that is the writing of history. 

#### The Macro in the Micro

>This global figure [of goods produced] varies from year to year; it rises, fall, or remains stationary, and the general movement is essential. It exerts its influence, in fact, on the formation of, and the variation in, the personal income of every individual peasant. (Ladurie, 76).

Something that I found very interesting in this study was this broader idea of the macro being imbedded, and perhaps dependent upon, the micro. Ladurie is nothing if not thorough when he describes the aspects of how the imports and exports of grains and olive oil helped and hindered the towns of greater Languedoc. However, when considering greater France and the surrounding areas of the Mediterranean, I began to see why this type of thoroughness would be incredibly useful. 

Historians are trained to think one way. We look for facts, we search for names and find connections. But when it comes to looking outside the field we consider the "historical" we tend to become unconfident and stumble when trying to understand foreign concepts like how wage of one peasant would effect diet, which would effect mortality, which would effect population, which in essence effects France. While our field has come a long way, we are still trying to incorporate those things that Bloch talked about, i.e. archeology, and realize that the inflation of grain and the immobility of a peasants wages could have contributed to the economy of France, thus having, even in a small sense, a effect on the Revolution in the 18th century. Seeing how the historian might take the effects of the economy and apply them to the wider world are, I have come to realize, very important. 

When I was unravelling this idea of the macro in the micro, I realized that it is a universal aspect that would apply to any field of history. It's hard to realize that the wage examples in 14th century would have an applicable meaning to the modern era, but it does all the same. If a historian is trying to understand, for example, why in a Marxist view, the people of a given town, city or country didn't rise up against the capitalist government, then perhaps it would be useful to look at not only the wage barrier and the rate of inflation on goods, but, as Ladurie does, the diet of the people who were the working class. 

Now we're not all food historians, but as he tells us part I of chapter 4 that while many of the peasant working class weren't the healthiest people in the world, they could afford a steady diet of bread and sour wine to keep themselves feed. While these people weren't nearly as sustained in their diets as the next tier of society, the reader is able to infer from the information of the *compoix* that the peasant was content with his life and happy to go about his menial business. The historian is then able to infer on a grander scale that while these people were over worked and underpaid, they had full bellies and were happy to stay in their walk of life. That is of course an oversimplification, but when I thought of my own research it did give me some ideas to explore as to why the Catholics were content with their way of life until the 1960s, and really didn't voice unhappiness with their Protestant ruling class. Perhaps if they were content with the economy during the 1950s, it would explain the almost sleepy quality Belfast and Derry had before 1968.  In any case, I learned a great deal, no so much about France, but how this method history could be applied on a larger context. 

#### The Human Element 

>Bloch himself, however, remained resolutely humanist, unlike later *Annalistes* who abandoned the "human subject" to study topics such as demography and climate. In Bloch's famous analogy, the "good historian is like the giant of the fairy tale. He knows that whenever he catches the scent of human flesh, there his quarry lies." (Clark, 66).

While this is a post in and of itself, I will say briefly that the biggest issue I had with this type of history is that it is indeed lacking in the human element. While the *Annalistes* wanted to make theirs a history of science thus making it a *true* history, it is so cold and number driven, that often I felt as if I was reading about a desolate planet called Languedoc. There was nothing that told me, while it was all interesting that a historian could writer so much on this relatively limited topic - meaning limited to this specific region -  really why this was crucially important to the development of France. But even though Ladurie intended to write a "history without people" he didn't succeed. Specifically on pages 99 and 109, among others, there are names of actual peasants, and suddenly this story becomes a little more personal. So while I see this type and method of historiography having its merits, I don't agree with writing the people out of it. 1) because it doesn't seem possible, and 2) because it loses it's meaning for the wider world and becomes too cold and calculating to be meaningful to even the most analytical of historians. 
